Omics Data Manager user guide
##############################

Our **Omics Data Manager (ODM)** workspace increases the productivity of all kinds of data-related projects across Life Sciences - from Agritech to Genomics. With so much breadth, it’s easy to get confused as to what exactly we do regarding **Data Management** and **File Management**. You might even think they’re two peas in a pod. Trust us, we get it - the two terms seem purely semantic (and maybe a little pedantic!) - yet there are core fundamental differences between the two!

**File Management** is present across a breadth of industries large and small; however, when scientific data is involved - it simply just isn’t sufficient. Why? Check out `our article here`_ to learn about the **Data Management** approach and its advantages.

**Important! Data Management**  has requirements, shown in this short video. `Get familiar with ODM basics`_.

With an understanding of **Data Management** under the belt, the next question is onboarding. When considering what ODM can do for you; *context is key*. What kind of user are you? An admin, a data contributor, a data consumer? All three? We have onboarding guides for each flow below.

User Admins
-----------

User management and administration can be grueling work when attempting without the proper software to help you on the path! Find out how ODM makes administration easy below.

`In this video`_ you will find out:

* Who are the two user classes: contributors and consumers
* How to create users and assign permissions
* How to create user groups and assign curator groups
* How to enable sharing and editing


Guide for data contributors
----------------------------

ODM’s main purpose for your contributors is to get them straight into all of the data available at your organization via a single access point. Data however, can still come from different sources; be it outside the organization or from within, generated by different teams and even through legacy data!

To make your data findable, you need to pass it through a curation (a.k.a. harmonization) procedure by *applying defined guidelines to your datasets* in order to make them easy for anyone with access to reach at any time!

Still unsure? Learn more by watching our videos below.

* `What a data template is`_
* `How to work with dictionaries and ontologies`_
* `How to create a Study and upload your data`_
* `How to curate your data`_



Guide for data consumers
------------------------

Those who are data all-consuming have one goal in mind when using ODM - generating that key insight! 

Want to know more? Learn more by watching our videos below.

* `How to search for the data needed`_
* `How to unlock the power of ODM with the advanced usage of APIs`_

.. _our article here: https://genestack.com/news/blog/data-management-in-life-sciences-key-concepts/
.. _Get familiar with ODM basics: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-p-_0MMAtHM&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=6
.. _In this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZAhTVz9YvQ&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=8
.. _What a data template is: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8Q4dXIDbIA&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=5
.. _How to work with dictionaries and ontologies: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8TZ4SdF5WVI&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=3
.. _How to create a Study and upload your data: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQeevS5-7Xk&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=7
.. _How to curate your data: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2190sUH-5PA&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=2
.. _How to search for the data needed: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CcXJ_F2DncQ&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=4
.. _How to unlock the power of ODM with the advanced usage of APIs: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7bLXBLp6Cxs&list=PLqGSwEO9VFw0fuFPC7MD0CLJw7ZLmXiLk&index=1




In Depth User Guide Articles
----------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   doc-odm-user-guide/quickstart_user
   doc-odm-user-guide/setup
   doc-odm-user-guide/create-study
   doc-odm-user-guide/import-samples-spreadsheet
   doc-odm-user-guide/import-data-using-api
   doc-odm-user-guide/import-data-using-python-script
   doc-odm-user-guide/exporting-data
   doc-odm-user-guide/xref-mapping
   doc-odm-user-guide/studybrowser
   doc-odm-user-guide/metadata-editor
   doc-odm-user-guide/template-editor
   doc-odm-user-guide/curator_guide
   doc-odm-user-guide/versioning
   doc-odm-user-guide/sharing
   doc-odm-user-guide/getting-a-genestack-api-token
   doc-odm-user-guide/supported-formats
   doc-odm-user-guide/system-requirements
